# HealthInsurance

## About the project
### Background
In Switzerland, healthcare costs have been rising year after year. This increase is reflected in growing premiums that can cause financial burden for some individuals [1]. A way in which this burden can be diminished, is selecting an appropriate health insurance based on individual’s characteristics and preferences.
Nevertheless, previous research has shown that individuals don’t always make rational decisions when it comes to selecting a health insurance [2–5], especially when there is uncertainty for example regarding one’s health, expenditures, etcetera. 
There might be several explanations as to why individuals don’t make rational decisions when selecting a health insurance. First, health systems are often complex, hard to navigate and lack transparency. Several factors such as health literacy, health insurance knowledge, health insurance literacy, education, information frictions, among others; can potentially hinder an individual’s ability to make the best decision for him or herself [6, 7]. Another possible explanation is that, in the face of uncertainty, individuals might rely on risk preferences and heuristics to make health insurance decisions [8]. 
Understanding the effect of different types of information, as well as the association between different factors such as the ones previously mentioned with health insurance choice can provide valuable information as to how to better inform health insurance consumers, identify vulnerable populations that might require greater assistance to navigate the health and insurance systems, and ultimately inform policies to improve and simplify them. 
The main aims of this study were to (1) assess the effect of different types of information on health insurance choice, (2) observe if individual’s choices align with their risk preferences, and (3) determine if provision of information helps individuals make more rational choices. 

### Objectives
To study the effect of different types of information for decision support on health insurance choices, as well as its association of choices with other factors such as limited attention, risk preferences, health insurance knowledge and health insurance literacy.

### Methods
Data collection was done through a computer-based laboratory experiment. The experimental tool was designed and programmed using oTree [9]. The computer-based experiment consists of 3 sections. First, participants go through introductory instructions and review questions to make sure they understand how the experiment works. After completing this section, they proceed to the main part of the experiment, which consists of 12 rounds, finally, they answer a survey that includes questions on willingness to pay for information, decisional conflict scale, risk preferences, health insurance knowledge, socio-economic factors, and general information.

### Experiment design
During the experiment rounds, participant cycle through different “screens” or pages. On the first round, participants are assigned a health insurance plan with a deductible of 300 points. Participants receive a fixed income on each round and can experience health events with different costs, these are determined randomly based on a given “risk profile” provided to participants, which states the probabilities of each event taking place. 
There are two types of events that can take place on each round, minor and major health events. Minor health events “A” or “B” affect only the round during which they take place. A major event is costlier than a minor event and affects 2 consecutive rounds, meaning the participant will have costs during the round in which the event takes place and the following one. Only one minor event can take place per round (no event, event A, or event B). Major events are independent from minor events, so that both a minor event and a major event can take place in the same round. A major event can take place again even if it occurred in the previous round, meaning that they can overlap. 
At the end of each round, participants can choose to keep their current health insurance or select a different one. 
The experimental treatments consist of different types of information for health insurance decision support, the following table summarizes the hypotheses associated with each treatment:
| Treatment | Description | Hypothesis |
|-----------|-------------|------------|
| Limited attention (0) | Going through rounds with distraction and no information provided regarding recommendations for HI | Control group – zero effect |
| Limited attention + unqualified information (1) | Going through rounds with distraction and unqualified or “general” information regarding recommendations for HI | Positive – mild effect improving health insurance choice (+) |
| Limited attention+ unqualified information + button for numerical information (2) | Going through rounds with distraction, unqualified information, and the option of paying for more specific information or recommendations using numerical information | Positive – moderate effect improving health insurance choice (++) |
| Limited attention + unqualified information + button for “graphical information” (3) | Going through rounds with distraction, unqualified information, and the option of paying for more specific information or recommendations using graphical representations of information | Positive – moderate effect improving health insurance choice (+++) |
| Limited attention + unqualified information + choice of receiving numerical or graphical information (4) | Going through rounds with distraction, unqualified information, and the option of paying for more specific information in either numerical or graphical format | Positive – moderate effect improving health insurance choice (+++) |
